---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/breaking-bad/"}
---

Related: #english
Contents: [[TERM 2/English/English Map of Contents\|English Map of Contents]]
[[Classes\|Classes]]
Ted Tudor || 2023-09-19
***
# Context and background 
Breaking Bad is a crime drama created by American filmmaker Vince Gilligan. Breaking Bad focuses in on the town of Albuquerque in New Mexico in 2008 and 2010.

Breaking Bad follows Walter White as he descends into the underworld of meth production. He initially starts cooking meth as a means of providing for his family after he succumbs to his terminal lung cancer, but later on his motivation changes to that of greed and pride.
# Thesis 
Breaking Bad is a TV crime drama which would be enlightening to the ATAR course as it is a wonderful example of how the attitudes and values of characters develop the complex themes of control, greed, and morality. It has the potential to teach an important lesson about the dubious morality of humanity, showing us all that nobody is a completely good or bad person. It utilises course concepts including symbolism and exploration of attitudes and values which allows us to question the ambiguous nature of the human experience. 

# The Fly 
Flies are a recurring motif within Breaking Bad. The fly is used to represent guilt, contamination, irrational obsession, and the loss of control in Walter White's life. In the episode “The Fly” a fly manages to find its way into the lab in which Walt and his partner Jesse cook meth. The majority of the episode takes place in the lab with the two of them trying to kill this fly that Walt calls a “contaminant” and he refuses to cook more meth until the fly is dead. Throughout this episode, Walter White's need for control within his life is symbolically displayed through how he interacts with the fly. 
At the start of the episode, the lab is tidy and clean, with Walter and Jesse making the lab spotless. Then a fly gets in. It begins to make its way around the spotless lab "contaminating" everything. That whole night Walt tries to catch it but can’t. When Jessie next comes to work Walt won’t let him cook with it alive. The fly however always evades Walt, it’s out of his control. Walter eventually gives up his relentless hunt, sits down, and says “It’s all contaminated.” After that whole ordeal, Walter finally decides to go home, and as he sits down on his bed, he sees another fly perched up on a fire detector. The fly has left the lab, and into his own life. The fly represents the way that the lab and the meth has contaminated his life. His wife hates him, he cant live in his own home, and hardly sees his son. 
Walter's obsession with this fly is a manifestation of his intense need for control. Whether it was his health, family, or his drug empire, Walt needed to be in control. And when he loses this control, his obsessive behavior is put on full display. This episode also portrays Walter's character arc and his switch in values. During the first episode, Walter cooked his first batch of meth inside of a dirty run down RV, but now he is suddenly concerned over a small fly in his lab. This change in behaviour is used in parallel with Walt's reason for cooking meth. At first, his need to cook meth was out of desperation, in order for his family to survive. But now that he has far surpassed his initial goals, he is no longer cooking for his family, but for his own pride and greed, therefore, it has to be perfect. 
Walt himself clearly feels emasculated. He has lost all respect within his life, he works a job where no one respects him, his wife doesn't appreciate him, and his cancer has stripped what little pride left he had. And that is why he needs his control, he is desperately clinging on to what he has left, and being such a kingpin in this meth business, has formed a sense of pride within him. This conveys how humans inherent nature leads them to seek what makes the feel successful, acknowledged, and respected. When external factors lead to a person losing pride and control over their lives, they may turn irrational and desperate for some of that control back, which is present in Walter White's character. Although his spiral is an extreme one, it portrays how humanity will do anything to feel accomplished and to have control. 

The genre of breaking bad is a crime drama. Conventions of that genre include a realistic plot and setting, and characters such as the criminal and the detective or officer unveiling the crime. In the case of Breaking Bad, the genre is slightly subverted as the protagonist is the criminal as opposed to the one fighting the crime. Hank Schrader, Walter's brother-in-law is a DEA agent and is the one striving to uncover the drug crimes of New Mexico. The events that unfold in Breaking Bad are exaggerated, but realistic enough to be set in the real world. The criminal sidekick archetype is embodied by Jesse Pinkman, who is Walter's partner in crime when cooking meth. A common theme in crime dramas is the dichotomy between good and evil. Breaking Bad utilises this theme with the progression of Walter White's character, who starts off as a struggling man trying to provide for his family, into a heartless criminal motivated by pride and greed. The audience sees the change from protagonist to antagonist throughout the show. In this way, the exploration of good and evil takes place mainly in the characterisation. Breaking Bad both follows and subverts aspects of the crime drama genre, with the characterisation in the show subverting the expectation that the main character is a moral crime-fighter, and other aspects following the genre.

In summary, Breaking Bad presents different aspects of the year 11 English course. In the episode 'The Fly' Walter White's need for control is represented through the fly, which is also used as a motif throughout the show, portraying moments when Walter White's life is out of control. This shows humanity's desire to have constant control over their lives and the desperate measures they will take to have that. The genre of crime drama is both followed and subverted by the show, twisting audience's expectations of a typical crime drama show. Breaking Bad is a good addition to the ATAR English course because of its utilisation of course concepts and innovative way of exploring complex themes. 



